README.md, before:

# Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks

This is the codebase for the paper: "Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks". TRM is a recursive reasoning approach that achieves amazing scores of 45% on ARC-AGI-1 and 8% on ARC-AGI-2 using a tiny 7M parameters neural network.

[Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04871)

### Motivation

Tiny Recursion Model (TRM) is a recursive reasoning model that achieves amazing scores of 45% on ARC-AGI-1 and 8% on ARC-AGI-2 with a tiny 7M parameters neural network. The idea that one must rely on massive foundational models trained for millions of dollars by some big corporation in order to achieve success on hard tasks is a trap. Currently, there is too much focus on exploiting LLMs rather than devising and expanding new lines of direction. With recursive reasoning, it turns out that “less is more”: you don’t always need to crank up model size in order for a model to reason and solve hard problems. A tiny model pretrained from scratch, recursing on itself and updating its answers over time, can achieve a lot without breaking the bank.

This work came to be after I learned about the recent innovative Hierarchical Reasoning Model (HRM). I was amazed that an approach using small models could do so well on hard tasks like the ARC-AGI competition (reaching 40% accuracy when normally only Large Language Models could compete). But I kept thinking that it is too complicated, relying too much on biological arguments about the human brain, and that this recursive reasoning process could be greatly simplified and improved. Tiny Recursion Model (TRM) simplifies recursive reasoning to its core essence, which ultimately has nothing to do with the human brain, does not require any mathematical (fixed-point) theorem, nor any hierarchy.

### How TRM works

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://AlexiaJM.github.io/assets/images/TRM_fig.png" alt="TRM"  style="width: 30%;">
</p>

Tiny Recursion Model (TRM) recursively improves its predicted answer y with a tiny network. It starts with the embedded input question x and initial embedded answer y and latent z. For up to K improvements steps, it tries to improve its answer y. It does so by i) recursively updating n times its latent z given the question x, current answer y, and current latent z (recursive reasoning), and then ii) updating its answer y given the current answer y and current latent z. This recursive process allows the model to progressively improve its answer (potentially addressing any errors from its previous answer) in an extremely parameter-efficient manner while minimizing overfitting.

### Requirements

- Python 3.10 (or similar)
- Cuda 12.6.0 (or similar)

```bash
pip install --upgrade pip wheel setuptools
pip install --pre --upgrade torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/cu126 # install torch based on your cuda version
pip install -r requirements.txt # install requirements
pip install --no-cache-dir --no-build-isolation adam-atan2 
wandb login YOUR-LOGIN # login if you want the logger to sync results to your Weights & Biases (https://wandb.ai/)
```

### Dataset Preparation

```bash
# ARC-AGI-1
python -m dataset.build_arc_dataset \
  --input-file-prefix kaggle/combined/arc-agi \
  --output-dir data/arc1concept-aug-1000 \
  --subsets training evaluation concept \
  --test-set-name evaluation

# ARC-AGI-2
python -m dataset.build_arc_dataset \
  --input-file-prefix kaggle/combined/arc-agi \
  --output-dir data/arc2concept-aug-1000 \
  --subsets training2 evaluation2 concept \
  --test-set-name evaluation2

## Note: You cannot train on both ARC-AGI-1 and ARC-AGI-2 and evaluate them both because ARC-AGI-2 training data contains some ARC-AGI-1 eval data

# Sudoku-Extreme
python dataset/build_sudoku_dataset.py --output-dir data/sudoku-extreme-1k-aug-1000  --subsample-size 1000 --num-aug 1000  # 1000 examples, 1000 augments

# Maze-Hard
python dataset/build_maze_dataset.py # 1000 examples, 8 augments
```

### Dataset Limits via YAML

Every config file now exposes three knobs to cap the number of processed examples per split:

- `train_example_limit`
- `val_example_limit`
- `test_example_limit`

Set any of them to a positive integer in your YAML (e.g. `config/cfg_pretrain.yaml`) to truncate that split to the desired number of samples. Values `<= 0` keep the full dataset. When a requested limit exceeds the available data, the dataloader prints a single warning and automatically falls back to the complete set so training and evaluation continue uninterrupted.

## Experiments

### Attention Variants (standard vs. GQA)

`config/arch/trm.yaml` keeps the original multi-head attention layout, while `config/arch/trm_gqa.yaml` reuses the same hyperparameters but enables grouped-query attention (`num_key_value_heads=4` for the default 8 heads). You can benchmark them with the same training recipe:

```bash
# Baseline TRM attention
run_name="pretrain_trm_baseline"
python pretrain.py arch=trm +run_name=${run_name}

# TRM + GQA
run_name="pretrain_trm_gqa"
python pretrain.py arch=trm_gqa +run_name=${run_name}
```

Both runs report to Weights & Biases the train/validation/test loss, accuracy, macro-F1, and the variance of the per-example accuracies (`train/accuracy_variance`, `test/accuracy_variance`, etc.), so you can compare convergence and stability directly on the dashboard.

### ARC-AGI-1 (assuming 4 H-100 GPUs):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_att_arc1concept_4"
torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 --rdzv_backend=c10d --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:0 --nnodes=1 pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/arc1concept-aug-1000]" \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=4 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True

```

*Runtime:* ~3 days

### ARC-AGI-2 (assuming 4 H-100 GPUs):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_att_arc2concept_4"
torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 --rdzv_backend=c10d --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:0 --nnodes=1 pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/arc2concept-aug-1000]" \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=4 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True

```

*Runtime:* ~3 days

### Sudoku-Extreme (assuming 1 L40S GPU):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_mlp_t_sudoku"
python pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/sudoku-extreme-1k-aug-1000]" \
evaluators="[]" \
epochs=50000 eval_interval=5000 \
lr=1e-4 puzzle_emb_lr=1e-4 weight_decay=1.0 puzzle_emb_weight_decay=1.0 \
arch.mlp_t=True arch.pos_encodings=none \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=6 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True

run_name="pretrain_att_sudoku"
python pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/sudoku-extreme-1k-aug-1000]" \
evaluators="[]" \
epochs=50000 eval_interval=5000 \
lr=1e-4 puzzle_emb_lr=1e-4 weight_decay=1.0 puzzle_emb_weight_decay=1.0 \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=6 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True
```

*Runtime:* < 36 hours

### Maze-Hard (assuming 4 L40S GPUs):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_att_maze30x30"
torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 --rdzv_backend=c10d --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:0 --nnodes=1 pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/maze-30x30-hard-1k]" \
evaluators="[]" \
epochs=50000 eval_interval=5000 \
lr=1e-4 puzzle_emb_lr=1e-4 weight_decay=1.0 puzzle_emb_weight_decay=1.0 \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=4 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True
```

*Runtime:* < 24 hours

## Reference

If you find our work useful, please consider citing:

```bibtex
@misc{jolicoeurmartineau2025morerecursivereasoningtiny,
      title={Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks}, 
      author={Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2510.04871},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04871}, 
}
```

and the Hierarchical Reasoning Model (HRM):

```bibtex
@misc{wang2025hierarchicalreasoningmodel,
      title={Hierarchical Reasoning Model}, 
      author={Guan Wang and Jin Li and Yuhao Sun and Xing Chen and Changling Liu and Yue Wu and Meng Lu and Sen Song and Yasin Abbasi Yadkori},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2506.21734},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.AI},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.21734}, 
}
```

This code is based on the Hierarchical Reasoning Model [code](https://github.com/sapientinc/HRM) and the Hierarchical Reasoning Model Analysis [code](https://github.com/arcprize/hierarchical-reasoning-model-analysis).

Commit message:

Adiciona instruções para uso de Docker com suporte a GPUs NVIDIA L4, facilitando o treinamento em um ambiente reproduzível.

README.md, after:

# Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks

This is the codebase for the paper: "Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks". TRM is a recursive reasoning approach that achieves amazing scores of 45% on ARC-AGI-1 and 8% on ARC-AGI-2 using a tiny 7M parameters neural network.

[Paper](https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04871)

### Motivation

Tiny Recursion Model (TRM) is a recursive reasoning model that achieves amazing scores of 45% on ARC-AGI-1 and 8% on ARC-AGI-2 with a tiny 7M parameters neural network. The idea that one must rely on massive foundational models trained for millions of dollars by some big corporation in order to achieve success on hard tasks is a trap. Currently, there is too much focus on exploiting LLMs rather than devising and expanding new lines of direction. With recursive reasoning, it turns out that “less is more”: you don’t always need to crank up model size in order for a model to reason and solve hard problems. A tiny model pretrained from scratch, recursing on itself and updating its answers over time, can achieve a lot without breaking the bank.

This work came to be after I learned about the recent innovative Hierarchical Reasoning Model (HRM). I was amazed that an approach using small models could do so well on hard tasks like the ARC-AGI competition (reaching 40% accuracy when normally only Large Language Models could compete). But I kept thinking that it is too complicated, relying too much on biological arguments about the human brain, and that this recursive reasoning process could be greatly simplified and improved. Tiny Recursion Model (TRM) simplifies recursive reasoning to its core essence, which ultimately has nothing to do with the human brain, does not require any mathematical (fixed-point) theorem, nor any hierarchy.

### How TRM works

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://AlexiaJM.github.io/assets/images/TRM_fig.png" alt="TRM"  style="width: 30%;">
</p>

Tiny Recursion Model (TRM) recursively improves its predicted answer y with a tiny network. It starts with the embedded input question x and initial embedded answer y and latent z. For up to K improvements steps, it tries to improve its answer y. It does so by i) recursively updating n times its latent z given the question x, current answer y, and current latent z (recursive reasoning), and then ii) updating its answer y given the current answer y and current latent z. This recursive process allows the model to progressively improve its answer (potentially addressing any errors from its previous answer) in an extremely parameter-efficient manner while minimizing overfitting.

### Requirements

- Python 3.10 (or similar)
- Cuda 12.6.0 (or similar)

```bash
pip install --upgrade pip wheel setuptools
pip install --pre --upgrade torch torchvision torchaudio --index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl/nightly/cu126 # install torch based on your cuda version
pip install -r requirements.txt # install requirements
pip install --no-cache-dir --no-build-isolation adam-atan2 
wandb login YOUR-LOGIN # login if you want the logger to sync results to your Weights & Biases (https://wandb.ai/)
```

### Dataset Preparation

```bash
# ARC-AGI-1
python -m dataset.build_arc_dataset \
  --input-file-prefix kaggle/combined/arc-agi \
  --output-dir data/arc1concept-aug-1000 \
  --subsets training evaluation concept \
  --test-set-name evaluation

# ARC-AGI-2
python -m dataset.build_arc_dataset \
  --input-file-prefix kaggle/combined/arc-agi \
  --output-dir data/arc2concept-aug-1000 \
  --subsets training2 evaluation2 concept \
  --test-set-name evaluation2

## Note: You cannot train on both ARC-AGI-1 and ARC-AGI-2 and evaluate them both because ARC-AGI-2 training data contains some ARC-AGI-1 eval data

# Sudoku-Extreme
python dataset/build_sudoku_dataset.py --output-dir data/sudoku-extreme-1k-aug-1000  --subsample-size 1000 --num-aug 1000  # 1000 examples, 1000 augments

# Maze-Hard
python dataset/build_maze_dataset.py # 1000 examples, 8 augments
```

### Dataset Limits via YAML

Every config file now exposes three knobs to cap the number of processed examples per split:

- `train_example_limit`
- `val_example_limit`
- `test_example_limit`

Set any of them to a positive integer in your YAML (e.g. `config/cfg_pretrain.yaml`) to truncate that split to the desired number of samples. Values `<= 0` keep the full dataset. When a requested limit exceeds the available data, the dataloader prints a single warning and automatically falls back to the complete set so training and evaluation continue uninterrupted.

### Docker (CUDA / L4)

Train inside a reproducible CUDA environment that targets NVIDIA L4 GPUs:

```bash
# Build image
docker build -t trm-l4 .

# Launch with GPU access and your local repo mounted
docker run --gpus all --rm -it \
  -v $(pwd):/workspace/TinyRecursiveModels \
  trm-l4
```

The image is based on `pytorch/pytorch:2.4.0-cuda12.1-cudnn8-runtime`, which ships with CUDA 12.1 capable of running efficiently on L4 cards (SM 8.9). Inside the container you can run the usual training commands, e.g. `python pretrain.py arch=trm`. Make sure the NVIDIA Container Toolkit is installed on the host so Docker can expose the GPU (`nvidia-smi` inside the container should list the L4 device).

## Experiments

### Attention Variants (standard vs. GQA)

`config/arch/trm.yaml` keeps the original multi-head attention layout, while `config/arch/trm_gqa.yaml` reuses the same hyperparameters but enables grouped-query attention (`num_key_value_heads=4` for the default 8 heads). You can benchmark them with the same training recipe:

```bash
# Baseline TRM attention
run_name="pretrain_trm_baseline"
python pretrain.py arch=trm +run_name=${run_name}

# TRM + GQA
run_name="pretrain_trm_gqa"
python pretrain.py arch=trm_gqa +run_name=${run_name}
```

Both runs report to Weights & Biases the train/validation/test loss, accuracy, macro-F1, and the variance of the per-example accuracies (`train/accuracy_variance`, `test/accuracy_variance`, etc.), so you can compare convergence and stability directly on the dashboard.

### ARC-AGI-1 (assuming 4 H-100 GPUs):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_att_arc1concept_4"
torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 --rdzv_backend=c10d --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:0 --nnodes=1 pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/arc1concept-aug-1000]" \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=4 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True

```

*Runtime:* ~3 days

### ARC-AGI-2 (assuming 4 H-100 GPUs):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_att_arc2concept_4"
torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 --rdzv_backend=c10d --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:0 --nnodes=1 pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/arc2concept-aug-1000]" \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=4 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True

```

*Runtime:* ~3 days

### Sudoku-Extreme (assuming 1 L40S GPU):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_mlp_t_sudoku"
python pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/sudoku-extreme-1k-aug-1000]" \
evaluators="[]" \
epochs=50000 eval_interval=5000 \
lr=1e-4 puzzle_emb_lr=1e-4 weight_decay=1.0 puzzle_emb_weight_decay=1.0 \
arch.mlp_t=True arch.pos_encodings=none \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=6 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True

run_name="pretrain_att_sudoku"
python pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/sudoku-extreme-1k-aug-1000]" \
evaluators="[]" \
epochs=50000 eval_interval=5000 \
lr=1e-4 puzzle_emb_lr=1e-4 weight_decay=1.0 puzzle_emb_weight_decay=1.0 \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=6 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True
```

*Runtime:* < 36 hours

### Maze-Hard (assuming 4 L40S GPUs):

```bash
run_name="pretrain_att_maze30x30"
torchrun --nproc-per-node 4 --rdzv_backend=c10d --rdzv_endpoint=localhost:0 --nnodes=1 pretrain.py \
arch=trm \
data_paths="[data/maze-30x30-hard-1k]" \
evaluators="[]" \
epochs=50000 eval_interval=5000 \
lr=1e-4 puzzle_emb_lr=1e-4 weight_decay=1.0 puzzle_emb_weight_decay=1.0 \
arch.L_layers=2 \
arch.H_cycles=3 arch.L_cycles=4 \
+run_name=${run_name} ema=True
```

*Runtime:* < 24 hours

## Reference

If you find our work useful, please consider citing:

```bibtex
@misc{jolicoeurmartineau2025morerecursivereasoningtiny,
      title={Less is More: Recursive Reasoning with Tiny Networks}, 
      author={Alexia Jolicoeur-Martineau},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2510.04871},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.LG},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04871}, 
}
```

and the Hierarchical Reasoning Model (HRM):

```bibtex
@misc{wang2025hierarchicalreasoningmodel,
      title={Hierarchical Reasoning Model}, 
      author={Guan Wang and Jin Li and Yuhao Sun and Xing Chen and Changling Liu and Yue Wu and Meng Lu and Sen Song and Yasin Abbasi Yadkori},
      year={2025},
      eprint={2506.21734},
      archivePrefix={arXiv},
      primaryClass={cs.AI},
      url={https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.21734}, 
}
```

This code is based on the Hierarchical Reasoning Model [code](https://github.com/sapientinc/HRM) and the Hierarchical Reasoning Model Analysis [code](https://github.com/arcprize/hierarchical-reasoning-model-analysis).
